it's thought you'd like to know that
those of you that are tweeting or
twittering we've now trended on the
global top 10 with the hash HH l zero
nine so keep buzzing away on that it
makes us quite proud as a group our next
speaker is Malcolm McLaren I invited map
them to book at this year's conference
following a series of meetings that we
had over Christmas I know NAT Malcom
from an earlier part of my career and
we'd remained in contact and stay
friends he hadn't occurred to me
initially to tell you the truth to
invite Malcolm to hand her learning
being an educational conference but as
we spoke one evening putting the world
to rights
we got on to the subjects of
transformation and what was happening in
the world not just in the financial
markets just just generally in all areas
and it struck me that we might not find
too many Malcolm's in our current
educational system or if they were they
wouldn't we wouldn't develop them and
wouldn't nurture them and find them and
that this would be a loss because love
malcolm or or not he is someone that has
not only been successful the continuous
reinvention but has stimulated numerous
cultural movements within his own
lifetime i'm not going to read through
an entire kind of biography because it's
frankly far too long
you know from managing various recording
bands from the Sex Pistols for
georgeanna meant bow-wow-wow to
directing films producing Fast Food
Nation is Steven Spielberg we've been
working with him II ran for mayor
gaining 10 percent of the vote
it just goes on and on just recently he
was exhibited at the Royal College of
Art so really to define Malcolm as this
personal that person is very very hard
for me and I think he's undefinable but
what he does do is reinnervation and for
that I applaud him so I'd like to invite
Malcolm McLaren to the stage for his
reflections on learning number
[Applause]
well this is not my subject no it's not
typical of what I do I've actually never
spoken about this before so it's my
first time and I there's kind of Graham
to ask me to come it was much more
difficult for me to think what the hell
is going to do here my own humble
experience I suppose is the best way for
me to offer some use in this debate and
conference and my experience of
attending or not attending more often
schools in London both at junior senior
and further education levels I have
these comments to make that goes towards
some way of providing useful debate here
from all the experiences I've had at
school and that I managed to put to use
here in the UK I frankly been accused of
being a charlatan a conman
or maybe most flatteringly
a culprit responsible for turning
British popular culture into nothing
more than a cheap marketing gimmick and
maybe this is right now my chance of
proofing everything they've said is
absolutely true
for me to sum up and it's important to
sum up if you can all popular culture
today in a simple phrase is really akin
I think in many respects to the word
education um or popular culture today
from Hollywood and all that that means
television the media event even politics
accepts and goes to great lengths I
think to promote the idea that it's cool
to be stupid
and for that it's a huge problem
whatever anybody says about education
today in the Western world in particular
I think in the anglo-saxon world I was
born in a culture of necessity just
after the war and today we live far more
in a culture of desires desire to become
famous overnight life's actual chosen
goal not to learn to be intelligent to
gain experience or skills not to spend
time struggling on anything like that
but to simply desire instant success and
hence what the UK have done is in
popular cultural terms is invent
something called a talent show that's
its legacy as far as I can tell
how on earth you might say can a child
care about acquiring even an education
if the culture itself is determined in
making people who have little or no
education at all feel cool
everyone in this society that's based on
that can all I think claim to be
successful for this world we live in
today is no more in my opinion in a
karaoke world and our science society
which provides us with only the
opportunity to revel in our stupidity
and to be successful at doing just that
if I were to sum up I guess in two words
how to explain what my struggle is what
exists today in terms of the battlefield
there are two words that sum up that
culture it is one is authenticity and
the other dare I say it is karaoke
a karaoke world is a is a world in which
life it is lived by proxy and it's its
life that's liberated by hindsight and
it's an unencumbered by what I call the
messy process of creativity in a karaoke
world you're free from any real
responsibility beyond that moment of
performance it's something that Tony
Blair made a great success of
authenticity on the other hand is
truthfully something that is more or
less the opposite it's it's about
discovering I suppose something that is
real that can only be achieved through a
struggle that adores romanticizes and
and actually makes that messy process a
romantic and noble pursuit in a karaoke
world everyone and everything is for
sale I I record Tony Blair trying to
brand the UK as cool Britannia how
stupid did we all think we were listen
to such trollop
the man was a absolute buffoon and
should have been hung you know at the
first point on Marble Arch we're tied
and once stood and as far as I have
concerned
you you really have to look hard today
at a situation in which in a karaoke
world everything and everyone is for
sale in a world that struggles to find
something authentic and maybe you do bit
like looking for a ruby in a field of 10
I'd say and it invariably or usually is
not for sale so what do most artists
what do most creative people do that
they spend their entire lives actually
trying to authenticate a karaoke culture
but to do that you have to be some kind
of Alchemist a magician to make that
happen and they and those people are
very rare today I I was a war baby
that means someone whose parents met
during the war you were born directly
after the war and they immediately split
up on gazing at you for the first time
you came out of that hole um
to be at school prove difficult for me
prove difficult for probably a lot of
other war babies score and life back
then was pretty disorganized and all I
can recall is spending one day at the
age of five in score and I never
attended again till I was nearly eight
years of age so I didn't go to school
when most people went to school I
actually hid inside my grandmother's
house I only looked at the world through
the letterbox often for the laundry man
or the ancient Breton creature on his
bike coming to sell onions at a
particular time of year or some guy
walking around trying to pick up scrap
iron there were hundreds and one
different kinds of Town Criers in those
days offering their wares all junctions
in the village of Stoke Newington where
I could live London was different
different then you never spoke to the
police you never dared it was considered
something scary you just spoke to
villains gangsters who stood on the
street corners offering you all kinds of
things that you couldn't ordinarily buy
in the stores London with a band of
communities and the education you had
was the experience on that street it
taught you many things and as the
economy got going those things began to
peter out and change suddenly you were
confronted with TV a program i recall as
a child called Dixon of dock green that
professed that and I think it must have
been sheer propaganda on behalf
for the BBC and the government to mine
that to get people to talk to policemen
if they were ever in trouble and this
guy was your good neighborly policeman
cook mr. Dickson PC Dickson and every
Saturday night at the right time he
would come on up and show you and
demonstrate how good and godly he was
because my grandmother immediately
turned off the TV and thought this is
complete garbage you can't watch this
you can't speak to such filth and I
understood at an early age that England
bred and basically taught through TV and
later on through school what I can best
describe as a culture of deception
England was a nation of liars born in
school you would at the age of eight I
recall confronting a classroom where a
large political map of the world existed
on the wall and the teacher when the
long came would hit that map every so
often and on it much of it was painted
in this dreadful horrible cyclamen pink
it was gaudy and he he looked at us all
and said that's ours you're looking at
it and was more or less half or more of
the world of course when you let go you
realize it was complete nonsense none of
it was it all changed he was practicing
and talking about things that really
didn't truthfully exist and he didn't
dare discuss all the insurgency battles
that were going on as people continued
to claim back and liberate themselves
from such Authority ISM and and fearful
repression
by the English so-called Empire this you
learnt of course as you got older um in
secondary school I did like a few
teachers I recall one who constantly he
was in charge of history and he had a
joke he said about Marilyn Monroe and
the cannibals and every time we asked
him to tell us this joke he would have
said no no no you're you're far too
young I recall him at the end of the
first term when I was like others
dragged into the school assembly room
and he jumped up onstage and he played a
song on the piano and it was the first
time I witnessed what I suppose could
return then a rock-and-roll record and
rock and roll song it was called
goodness gracious great balls of fire
and I watched him and I actually thought
his head was going to fall off his
shoulders because it was shaking so much
and I was sitting front row and I
thought I was going to get it in my lap
and it was I have to say it was a
cultural moment for me and um it did
transport me in some strange way as I
began to reach puberty that that sense
of of desire um hit me where it truly
hurt and you went out and you grabbed
all you could not that you've got very
much at the end one prayed at the altar
but you didn't get any sex or sexual
satisfaction as Mick Jagger was later to
record
um I finally after leaving school at
sixteen not wanting to continue anymore
I spent most of my days I have to say
digging up the garden at the back of the
staff room because I was consistently
late literally 300 days a year and most
of my breaks and time was spent looking
at worms I was glad to leave I guess but
not glad to have a job my mother a
dreadful snob a desire desired something
for me and upon looking at the labor
exchange and the man who read out like a
Magna Carta a whole list of
possibilities and prospects from the
shelling peas and a factory making of by
rows or some such a nonsense and then
something that caught my mother's
attention was a trainee wine taster God
knows I hadn't even drunk a glass of I
had no idea what we're going on but that
was it for her this was something she
could at least exchange with others at
some soiree or cocktail party that her
son was a trainee wine taster so I ended
up in a Dickensian Garret at the top of
an old building adjacent to the Royal
Academy of Art in London and there I was
confronted with these horrible military
ex generals and captain's who had
obviously lived their life in a hammock
in some goddamn Far East and place in
Borneo or somewhere with a crate of
Beaujolais under it
drinking their life away because their
faces were so red I just couldn't
believe it and there they had blue lines
through it like a cheese and and so we
would with a number of other kids into
this wine tasting career would address
him in private as old blue face it
wasn't fun but it was interesting when I
recall now having to tell these stories
to you that London was a forlorn place
and these people were people coming back
from once having ruled the Empire to now
still in their mid-forties and and
having certain life left in them to work
were now on civvy Street teaching us and
you imagine about wine tasting well let
me tell you how it went this form of
Education was extraordinary because I
was a virgin as were many others in in
the group at the time well wine would be
discussed not in terms of citrus fruits
black currants apricots or whatever but
totally in terms of sex it's wide it's
got too much fat under the arm this one
virginal needs to open a bit get that
legs spread out McClaren and then we can
drink it as God appointed us this wine
that's all right for those frogs tastes
like an Army's been through it this
Rowan doesn't know what sex it is this
wine
definitely homosexual well you have to
imagine this was all done with
blindfolds as you were hearing this guy
beating your head with such stuff and
you having tasted the wine yes sir you
would say yes Wayne's fortune on yes a
needs to open up a bit err a bit so then
we can drink it right so just like God
appointed us
that's right McLaren and what's this
like tastes like an Army's been through
it sir oh my dirty horrible that's right
just good for the Frog but not for
outing we don't we don't go into that
stuff and at the end of every lunch hour
we would be marshalled downstairs like
we're in the army and war we would walk
with the colonel at the front across
Piccadilly down into some greasy spoon
little cafe and with our so-called
luncheon vouchers we would indulge in
spotted dick which was one of the feast
in such cafes at that time if I recall
it was a sausage roll would custard over
it um it was absolutely dreadful and one
day I just couldn't take it anymore I
would always be arriving home drunk I
would never ever get off at the stop on
the Underground that I was supposed to I
would end up always at the end of the
line waking up and going all the way
back to my stop it was impossible
because I was not used to wine even
though we spat it out it didn't matter
elevenses and four o'clock you think
were time for Tebow no not here it was
time to indulge in every kind of port
and sherry the company San Dimon's we're
proud of
you even had to wear their cufflinks and
one day I decided to avoid this kernel
and dive into an alcove one a shop of
some sort I thought and let the the the
group march past and wait there with my
heart beating for about four or five
minutes thinking and hoping the coast
was clear I would then relax
and I was happened it was a complete
chance incident I happened to be
standing in the foyer or of of Saint
Martin's School of Art on Charing Cross
Road and I thought these girls looked
great as they kept filing part and I
followed them in they're curious to see
what was inside this school and I came
across as I marched upstairs looking
through these little windows at people
on easels um drawing with charcoal and
pencil this huge abundant woman with
enormous breasts
Italy naked and I thought this is a far
better job what do I want to be doing
with these kernels this is dreadful I've
got to get myself fired and I promptly
did by smoking a whole packet of those
filthy French cigarettes as they caught
is your tan and filled the tasting room
with clouds of smoke so when the colonel
arrived back from lunch he would declare
in his most racist and nasty turn what
selfie has been in here and of course I
immediately claimed the guilty party and
he said I'm going to write to your
mother you're nothing more than a
saboteur and of course I adored the very
thought that I was now going to be
thrown
out and shortly afterwards I did against
my mother's wishes attend art school art
school became very interesting to me for
the first time in my education in that
by drawing by working on my creative
side it helped me get along with myself
it provided me with a way in to a world
that I didn't truthfully quite
understand it gave me an identity that I
actually didn't have and it gave me a
pursuit funnily enough this may shock
most of you because I'm so old and
you're so young that at that time on my
first day in art school I'd recall I was
surrounded by kids in short trousers I
thought my god it I didn't realize it
we're starting in the junior I thought I
was being put into the junior Department
of this article but no these 12 year
olds were chosen chosen from local
schools as having a certain talent
poached out of those schools and put
into an art school so they could develop
that side of themselves that maybe
genius that was back in those days and I
think they followed the the actual
manifesto of none other than that grand
old socialist designer artist William
Morris and if he hadn't have been as
some teacher said for old bill Morris
none of us would be here because he was
the guy that set out to hammer down the
door of Queen Victoria to make everyone
throughout this country have at least
a day or so after toiling in the factory
or working in the mines to get up and
make something beautiful with their
lives with some for in some form or
another a piece of embroidery a pot a
painting and so on and during the course
of that all these so-called
working-class institutions were created
which later were labeled art scores and
a voila this is where I said my first
lecture was very important to me I
didn't know at the time a goatee bearded
professor probably still hanging on to
those romantic ideas of William Blake or
or William Morris struck a chord that
made it difficult for everyone new in
attendance the little 12 year old boys
in short trousers myself and others of
what our role was of what we came to be
and why we came to be in this art school
it was clear as he said if you think any
one of you are going to be successful
painters sculptors graphic designers
filmmakers Sajan designers and so on
there's the door
because you're bloody not not anyone of
you and we'd only literally been in that
school for a half an hour Anna ones head
sunk into one shoulders and you really
didn't want to catch his attention and
didn't know what was coming next a few
minutes elapsed and then he said well
you know what it is that you're going to
do is you're going to learn how to fail
what did that truthfully mean was
difficult for a seventeen-year-old
like myself and others to understand and
then he went further and said well you
know failure is not so bad it helps you
get up in the morning take the pillow
off your head roll up your sleeves this
is a messy job being an artist and then
he walked out a year later many had
fallen off the cliff and there were
maybe half of us left and he reappeared
a little older of course but with the
same aggression and the same serious
tone and so he said so I think maybe
some of you have learnt about failure
and we didn't know quite what he meant
and we thought yeah maybe he said well
don't think you can just bloody fail so
I my god what is he saying now in his
continued to say because you can't just
bloody fail you've got to learn how to
be a magnificent brilliant flamboyant
failure rather than any kind of benign
success that phrase haunted me for the
next five years I actually didn't know
what he was saying but I learned that it
was something rather deep and important
in my education
as an artist and I finally came to
understand it it was about being
fearless fearless of failing because
that was the only way you would ever
find anything out for yourself that
counted it was the struggle of doing
that it was a journey said without end
because upon arrival if you ever do
arrive when you do you'll be dead and
for me it became clear that that was the
only way to achieve any kind of progress
any possibility of changing the culture
and indeed maybe just for a moment
changing life itself that was a very
romantic philosophy that pursuit of
learning that way of working I I
continued to study in art school for
many years almost eight in total and
towards the end after having read a
number of things in particular
Baudelaires book painter of Modern Life
I realized there was a sense and a way
of exploring the world that was very
different from what most people teach
today it was about being inspired it was
about the art of discovery discovery of
new things it was about experiencing the
unknown without any clear map
it was about being in search of that
private moment than any kind of lesson
it wasn't about walking through the
streets and tracing down the major sites
and ticking them off a list of sort of
standard wonders not at all
the crowd was about your domain as the
air is that as he said of the bird of
the sea of the fish your passion your
whole Creed was to Wed that crowd and to
be a passionate observer to take an
immense pleasure in taking up home
residence in this kind of sense of
multiplicity to immerse yourself in the
bath of that grout in whatever is
seething moving ever Nathan and infinite
and even though you were not at home but
in a strange land navigating like that
turning left when you're supposed to
turn right you would feel at home
everywhere you would see everyone and
you'd be at the center of everything and
yet you would remain hidden from
everybody and I became enthralled by
that very idea and I think in a sense
that set me up those two thoughts how to
become a magnificent failure and how to
live one's life like a flan urn
Baudelaires day even though today is
very different in the way cities look
as an art student I became enthralled by
movies of Antonioni and a jean-luc
Godard and particularly in God ours
profound desire to eulogize the work of
Roger Vadim I never forget I attended a
lecture of the National Film theater and
they're a very typical stiff English
film critic from the guardian of all
papers asked mr. Goddard what his
favorite filmmaker was and he said Roger
had him and the guy nearly fell off his
chair he said why don't you train wider
not not Eisenstein not Mel no no no
Roger Vadim wide missing why Roger that
Dean Roger Vadim was known for
discovering Brigitte Avada and making
the film God created woman and God had
said because Vadim is the greatest
amateur and that as I walked out of that
theater did more to me than anything
else to inspire my journey being thrown
out of art school with a number of other
folk disenfranchised malfunctioning
typical war baby what were you going to
do how are you going to deal with this
horrible real world that you've stepped
away from for so long I thoroughly got
depressed actually but ten years later
after that lecture the cult of the
amateur was labeled punk
something I had been inadvertently
responsible for but something I owe much
to their old professor who talked about
how to be a magnificent failure by 1976
I'd opened this store sex on the
kingsroad and conceived and named a band
The Sex Pistols why I just wanted a
group of young Thuggee kids who could be
assassins who could go out and destroy
what I saw to be a horrible commodified
world a world in which there was fast
becoming very little space for anyone to
do anything at all individual I made
clothes that looked like they were
destroyed because I didn't want clothes
to look new I wanted a group to look
like they were destroying everything
because I didn't want them to look new
and the word pistols just so you know
was given to them because they were
barely 18 and I thought their penises
would be only this big rather than this
big I I basically came up with this idea
of designing the first pair of bondage
trousers why because I wanted trousers
to appear as if you could you were
selling them but also appear to the
average eye as trousers impossible to
wear because they would the legs were
tied together and it would be impossible
to walk in the idea of selling something
so impractical really underlined and
underscored everything that art
professor was trying to tell me it was a
declaration of war against repression
both the shop and the group came to
represent that look
that look of music and equally the sound
of the Sex Pistols came to be represent
the fashion I'd understood during the
course of art school that there were two
most important moments in life one was
the desire and ultimate practice of sex
and the other was the preparation and
ultimate death and those two moments
really became very important to me in
configuring something that was
ultimately labeled punk um I believe
that sex translated into fashion became
fetish and second to them was the very
embodiment of youth and youth had to
behave irreverently I believe that and
it had to take drugs I believe that
because of the fundamental belief in its
own immortality which it needed to
assert over and over and over again sex
became a place that was magical
fetishism in both ways
yes grammar senior sex in both ways what
people spent hours there and no one
wanted to live and in it I think I
created a feeling that was both euphoric
and hysterical you felt an enormous
range of possibilities and whatever was
happening
couldn't be predicted and that was
fantastic because it was a movement
toward a place unknown I made ugliness
beautiful by using kidnap ransom note
lettering against all values of what was
perfect and good-looking typography I
made a cover of an album look like a
detergent box why because the bin' are
the
now was important anyone who lost the
connection with the fundamental in art
also lacks the sense for the banal I
don't mean the ability to see that
something is banal but the ability to
understand the artistic value of
banality I did as Graham brown Martin
said yes eventually a lecture I was
press-gang basically by some guy who had
a huge grudge against tony blair at the
time and wanted me to drop a bomb in the
middle of it all and caused a lot of
fuss by declaring myself a mayoral
candidate at the Millennium and it was
during the course of having to create
some kind of manifesto taking into
account all my life and times I I
decided that instead of spending money
as the government had on this dreadful
dome which really just truly represented
corporate greed and their excess it was
horrible to think that that was
something that UK should be proud of I
thought of spending the same money on
students if every kid I thought of
eighteen free flight to somewhere
somewhere that they could enjoy and
investigate as Baudelaire once did his
own city of Paris be a flaner basically
of some kind I thought of bringing the
countryside into the park to reconnect
to life plan tortures in High Park put a
pig farm in Kensington Gardens right
next to where Princess died once lived
um I thought of turning out all the
lights and and enabling a city to look
at the sky and seeing all these terrible
things happening to libraries everywhere
closing down in every in every part of
London and it in fact the library in
Stoke Newington that
up and and lift with for so long I
thought of installing pubs in there the
only way maybe to reinvent them so we
could all have a beer whilst reading
Dickens or whatever today's articles
probably don't trade in any of that
philosophy anymore what I've understood
in 20 years since Thatcher this idea was
driven out replaced by high fees that
determine who would go to art school if
you could pay or not changed the very
way society breeds any kind of genius
yes we were cast out people like me
could never have possibly entered Asko I
mean far too rebellious Thatcher felt
there was no need you see or any use for
having people studying how to become
failures no malfunctioning people who
have not been set up correctly to have a
trade no and what is this word
philosophy well how can you get a job
doing that immediately universities
would just drive it off their syllabuses
and art schools became places merely for
careers the very word that I do recall
was actually driven out of your brain
never ever mention you were having a
career at art school in my day it would
be just spat upon these teachers
teaching these noble pursuits died off
and with it I suspect so did the
philosophy that romantic pursuit of
learning and education died off with it
in my experience to date
and what's been replaced what has it
what's been replayed what what what's
happening I think technology has
unquestionably put something else in its
place but it's not used necessarily
correctly if you can use technology to
rediscover the idea of a flaner the idea
of the romantic notion of learning for
learnings sake the idea of art for art's
sake not career then maybe because
information is accessible now of course
and an extremely low cost of course
everyone knows that but you can't fall
into the trap that you can just slit
around online use the internet and
technology to discover new ideas maybe
be a virtual flaner maybe debate go
further and deeper maybe don't take
information for granted just because
it's free one did its core and when we
learnt back in the 50s that the UK would
was a nation of liars and simply taught
a culture of deception use technology in
the right way and don't become a slave
to it that is don't become so reliant on
it that you can't calculate or read a
map because how do you know then to turn
left rather than turn right how do you
know how to even spot a lie use
technology as a tool just like a pencil
for learning it's not a replacement for
applied learning basically it's not a
replacement either for experience
that's it
Thank You Malcolm for that awesome very
well put points in there we might have
to edit the video before we stream it do
you want to take that I never liked that
we already know the time but I want to
take one questions it would be it will
be such a shame not to to have one
question to Malcolm hopefully he'll be
around over the coffee break one
question please gentle at the back with
the puzzle shirt with a microphone
it kind so how do we get away from our
karaoke culture and the question is how
do we get away from our karaoke culture
I think is yeah I think if you had to
ask a child how does he deal with a
culture that basically declares well to
be stupid as cool and everybody seems to
be able to enjoy that fact it's very
very hard for anyone to pursue learning
to struggle when you don't have to
struggle and everybody in a karaoke
culture can be successful instantly how
do you change that what why do you think
people are going to learn to struggle I
think it's a pity those old boys aren't
still around to teach the other way it's
a pity because the other way actually at
the end of the day is more sexy I think
it's about sexiness I think that the
authentic is more sexy than karaoke
karaoke is about an inflatable
doll the authentic is about doing the
real thing that's that's the difference
well thank you
let's the that's a terrific way to end
the